ROBERTA RICHMAN: This
is a tough-guy world
and we have to control
all of their movement
and their behavior
because that's
the way you keep an
institution safe for everybody
who lives in it.
We have everybody here,
murderers and rapists,
sex offenders, drug
addicts, every body.
My name is Dennis.
I'm 52 years old.
I'm serving a 15-year sentence
for assaulting my wife.
My name's Louis.
35.
Sold narcotics since
I was about 13 or so.
My name is Juan.
I'm 34 years old.
I'm here for a
second-degree murder.
Sadly, it's my charge.
My name is Salim.
I'm 39.
I'll be 40 soon.
And I was given a life term.
A lot of times what
lands people in prison
and what brings
them back is a lack
of good problem-solving skills
and good communication skills.
Fleet approached us asking if
he could do some work in here.
We were challenged
by our union wanting
to know how we could possibly
bring an ex-offender in.
I served 14 and 1/2 years on
a 25-year no parole sentence.
Hello.
Having served for 14 years
boosts his credibility,
boosts his credibility
with inmates.
How's your weekend?
Good.
Yeah.
[CHATTER]
When I got locked up, I really
hit a wall of just seeing
the craziness of my
life path up until then
and on the incredible selfish
decisions I've been making.
My son was nine years old.
He was going to grow
up without his dad.
And I was just so deeply
full of remorse and regret
that I just literally
started practicing meditation
like my hair was on fire.
So I became extremely motivated
to turn my life around.
And so I was living life
with this prison monk.
I was sourcing a meditation
group twice a week in a chapel.
I started receiving
letters from prisoners
while I was in prison.
I had published some articles.
People knew about me out
in the world a little bit.
And they started sending
some of these letters
to me thinking I would
know what to do with them.
I worked in the
education department.
I had access to a copy machine.
I would copy articles
out of books.
And I put together
a little thing
and I'd send it
off to a prisoner.
So it started off
that way, and I
decided it was a much
bigger deal than I
could do from my prison cells.
You know, I think we have
a co-creative relationship
with our life.
We can't control other people.
We don't control life.
But is there is some
relationship between what
we put out and what comes back?
Freedom before I came
here was just another word.
I had never been
to prison before.
All you know is what
the media and the movies
say about prison, you know.
Take care of yourself,
man, somebody
is going to try to take
your manhood or something,
you know what I mean?
I thinking I'm going to come
in here and fight the world.
In a prison like Marin,
there's a serious conflict
waiting around any corner.
It's an environment
where people's
worst behaviors are just right
there, just under the surface.
When I first came in,
fought with offices,
would beat up anyone, would do
the unthinkable just because.
It's a vicious cycle because
once you come to prison,
your life just keeps
tumbling, tumbling, tumbling.
And it's like a never-ending
wall that won't stop building
unless you find some way
to get over that wall
or at least in front of it.
What circumstances did they
have to survive on the street
to bring them to
where they are now?
Do we want to save those lives?
Or do we want to discard them?
The crimes I committed, I
brought shame to not only
myself but to those who I love.
I'm just really
trying to do something
to get out of that cycle.
Somebody is giving us an
opportunity just to meditate
and connect ourselves.
And that's golden.
So sit up with
that good posture.
Just rest your
hands on your legs.
And just take a
moment to just feel.
I've always thought that
the people who survive
are so much stronger
than I could ever be.
I asked Fleet how he survived
and thrived the way he has.
He credits meditation for
having given him the strength
to live his life in prison and
come out not as much the worse
for wear as most people do.
I don't have a release
date so I can only
go home when they decide I can.
So I learned to live
day by day and that
helped me to deal with prison.
And I could only do that
being in the moment,
being in the now.
It's like if I don't
like what's going on,
what can I do to shift it?
If I don't like the
relationship I have with my boss
or with one of the
COs or something,
could I approach that
person in a different way?
Can I get creative
about what I'm
doing to bring about a
shift in the way things are?
In other words, owning
my own situation.
So how do you resolve that?
I take a breath and
then I step back really--
They suddenly get that
there's this whole thing there
that they thought
was who they are.
That's the only
reality they knew.
Suddenly they get to step
outside of that a little bit.
You just see the
lights go on and it's
like this sudden illumination.
It's like a mini
enlightenment of sorts.
And that's very powerful.
That's what keeps me coming in.
The reality of it is I'm living
life and meditation it has
brought a new perspective in the
way that it gave me like a tool
to really look inside myself
and change the way I am.
People don't understand
the value of what
they call the soft stuff.
And I sometimes think
without the soft stuff,
no matter how much hard stuff
you have, you're bound to fail.
You can live your life.
You can be yourself.
You can show others
that this isn't a place
to breed a better criminal.
This could actually be a place
to breed a better person.
You're here because the way
that you were didn't work.
So why not be better?
The people in prison are us.
They're not monsters
and more importantly
whether we want them too or
not, they're getting out.
So do you want them
to come out angrier
and meaner and more
dangerous than they
were when they came in?
Or do you want to
do whatever you
can to change their
behavior while they're here?
We need people to see
and experience prisoners
stepping out of that culture and
doing something transformative
with their lives.
And then people will
start to have faith.
People will see people coming
back to their community.
And they realize
these are human beings
and that human beings
lives have value
and they're not expendable.